             LABOR COSTS AND LABOR COST CORRECTIONS


TOPIC                                            PARA        PAGE

General                                          6-1         6-1

Policy                                           6-2         6-1

Labor and Labor Costs Corrections Procedures     6-3         6-3

Accounting Procedures                            6-4         6-5




                               6-i
                                                          ER 37-1-30
                                                            Change 9
                                                           15 Sep 10


                               CHAPTER 6

                 LABOR COSTS AND LABOR COST CORRECTIONS


6-1.  General. This chapter prescribes the accounting policy for
recording labor costs and correcting labor errors.  The
objective is to ensure that each Corps of Engineers employee
understands the importance of correctly recording labor costs in
the Corps of Engineers Financial Management System (CEFMS) .
This chapter applies to all Corps of Engineers employees.

6-2.   Policy.

      a.  The Corps of Engineers is a project-oriented
organization.  Labor costs are appropriately charged to the
benefitting project, customer, facility, overhead or leave
account.

       b. Labor costs are subject to the provisions of 31 USC
3512(e) and the Statement of Federal Financial Accounting
Standard #4, paragraph 49, which requires each agency to record,
accumulate and allocate managerial costs on an accrual basis.
Labor costs are recorded through the end of each month using the
early labor cutoff procedures in CEFMS.

      c.  Pursuant to 31 USC 1301, labor hours actually worked
on a specific project or customer order are charged to that
project or customer order. Accordingly, legitimate labor
costing errors or corrections to estimated labor must be
processed promptly.  Under no circumstances will labor hours
actually worked on a specific project or customer order be
charged or transferred to another project or customer order, a
departmental overhead account, a general and administrative
overhead account, or a shop and facility account to:

       (1)   Compensate for funding shortfalls;

      (2)  Liquidate or reduce balances in accounts with funds
that will expire at the end of the current fiscal year;


                                  6-1
ER 37-1-30
Change 9
15 Sep 10

       (3)  Eliminate or avoid credit balances in accounts
resulting from posting of labor actually worked;

       (4)   Mask potential anti-deficiency act violations;

       (5)   Mask cost overruns;

       (6)   Facilitate performance of work in advance of receipt
of funds;

       (7)   Avoid reprogramming actions.

       d.  It is the policy of the Chief of Engineers to identify
the recording of labor costs and other applications of fiscal
performance measures as part of performance standards for all
labor certifying supervisors or work leaders, program/project
managers, and division/staff office chiefs.

      e.  Program, project or facility account managers will
direct all team members to stop work on a project or other work
order upon exhaustion of funds and notify customers that work is
being stopped until the funding issue is resolved.

      f.  Methods of Determining Labor Cost Rates.  Employees
are initially paid from the USACE Revolving Fund.  The labor and
payroll account is charged with the gross earnings of these
employees and credited with labor cost distributions.  USACE
uses the 'Effective Time Method.'  Under this method, the labor
cost rates for the regular tour of duty and overtime consist of
actual pay rates increased to include the cost of government-
provided benefits and a factor for all paid leave.  Labor costs
for night differential and holiday pay are computed at the
actual pay rate.  The effective time method provides the means
to:

       (1)  Charge projects or customer orders for time actually
worked at a rate which will absorb the amount of pay for annual
and shore leave accrued, sick or other leave taken, holidays,
administrative leave granted, severance pay entitlement, and
continuation pay for traumatic job-related injuries.



                                   6-2
                                                       ER 37-1-30
                                                         Change 9
                                                        15 Sep 10

        (2) Accumulate a balance in the labor and payroll account
to approximate the monetary value of annual leave, shore leave,
restored leave, compensatory time, travel compensatory time, and
credit hours, to include the associated amounts for Medicare
 (MDCR) and Old Age/Survivors Disability Insurance (OASDI) due
employees.

       (3) When employees receive cost of living allowances
(COLA), it is necessary to compute the COLA on the effective pay
rate. This provides the reserve from which the labor cost is
absorbed when the employee is on leave.

        (4) Average Rates for Groups of Employees.  Under this
method, an average effective time hourly rate is established and
used for costing labor of employees engaged in a common activity
such as shops, floating plant, and executive, advisory and
administrative functions.   Equitable costing as well as economy
are prerequisites for use of the average effective labor rate
method.

      g.  Supervisors are required to maintain documentation of
each employee's labor submission for audit purposes. See ER 37-
1-30, chapter 9.

       h. Resource management officers are responsible for
ensuring that policies outlined in this chapter are in place and
working effectively.  They are responsible for leading the
effort to provide local training regarding project labor costing
and fiscal responsibility.

6-3.   Labor and Labor Costs Corrections Procedures.

       a.  Labor charges will automatically post to the cited
work item regardless of funds availability.   Labor charges made
in excess of a labor purchase request available balance will
reduce the appropriate funding account and can result in a
negative fund account balance.   When this occurs the responsible
employee for each work item is notified via electronic mail from
CEFMS. Appropriate action must be taken immediately as, if not
corrected in a timely manner, an Anti-Deficiency Act violation
can occur.


                                6-3
ER 37-1-30
Change 9
15 Sep 10

       b.  Costs charged to programs, projects, facilities, or
customer orders are based on actual work performed.
Departmental Overhead and General and Administrative overhead
costs are allocated based on direct labor charges, ensuring an
equitable distribution of overhead in accordance with accounting
standards.  Overhead adjustments (cost transfers) are not
processed for the purpose of decreasing or expending the balance
on a completed work activity or customer order, or for the
purpose of concealing a shortage of funds in a program, project,
facility or customer order.

       c. Labor costs transfers will be prepared by the
initiator and approved by the employee, the employee's
supervisor, and either the program manager, project manager,
facility account manager, program analyst, or responsible
employee for the funded work items on both sides of the
transaction.  The following information is required:

       (1) Identification and signature of the individuals who
determined the need for the labor cost transfer;

        (2) The timeframe for the transaction;

        (3) Erroneous labor charge code and correct labor charge
code;

        (4) Cost hour type;

        (5) Organization code;
