                              DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
                               U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS
                                      441 G STREET NW
                                WASHINGTON, D.C. 20314-1000



CECS


MEMORANDUM FOR COMMANDERS, MAJOR SUBORDINATE COMMANDS,
DISTRICTS, CENTERS AND LABS

SUBJECT:     Revision of ER 5-1-11, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USAGE) Business
Process


1. ER 5-7-1, Project Management, issued on 30 September 1992, introduced USAGE
to the concept and rules of project management. ER 5-1-11, Program and Project
Management, originally issued on 27 February 1998, applied those project management
principles to programs as well, and mandated that all work performed by USAGE would
follow the Project Management Business Process (PMBP), without exception. The
regulation also dictated that all work be "managed using the PM automation information
systems (AIS) and PMBP ."

2. This led to the unwritten but nonetheless powerful corporate oral tradition that "all
work is a project" and that all work must be loaded into our PM AIS. The USAGE
Business Process imperatives were introduced in the 17 August 2001 revision. We have
operated under ER 5-1-11 for almost nine years now, and have learned that the
efficiencies of the PMBP are not realized in all types of work. We also discovered the
limitations of attempting to manage all work within the PM AIS.

3. In order to align ourselves with industry standards, and in response to the
recognition that all work is NOT a project, this revision of ER 5-1-11 clearly defines the
concept of "project," as well as the work that we undertake that is NOT a project. It also
dictates the process for managing non-project work as well as our corporate data. The
new ER requires consistent, timely and accurate use of corporate AIS. All USAGE
programs, to include project and non-project work, will be captured in P2, however the
level of detail will be dependent upon the specific program and category of work.

4. Appendix C of this revision is a graphical representation of the organization of ER 5-
1-11, as well as its relationship to other doctrine and processes. Many of the PMBP
imperatives are smart business and effective for any type of work; these imperatives
have been moved under the USAGE business doctrine, which are the overarching
philosophy and operation principles that qpply to the whole U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers. Three additional imperatives relate only to the management of projects (as
defined by this regulation) and are then retained under the Project Delivery Process -
the PMBP. While the process of managing projects is well-defined, we now have the
doctrine in place to develop more detailed processes to manage our non-project work
as well as our corporate data.
CECS

SUBJECT:    Revision of ER 5-1-11, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USAGE) Business
Process


5. Point of contact for this revision is Mary Gauker, Deputy, Program and Project
Management Community of Practice (CECW-CB), 202-761-1811 or
Marv.C.Gauker@hq02.usace.army.mil.

FOR THE COMMANDER:




                                        Colonel, or s of Engineers
                                        Chief of Staff
                                DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY                             ER 5-1-11
                                 U.S. Army Corps ofEngineers
CECW-CB                          Washington, D.C. 20314-1000

Regulation                                                                  1 November 2006
No. ER 5-1-11


                                       Management
                                 USACE BUSINESS PROCESS

1. Purpose. This regulation establishes policy and doctrine to accomplish all work performed
by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE).

2. Applicability. This regulation applies to all USACE activities, all USACE employees, and
all functions.

 3. Distribution. Approved for public release, distribution is unlimited.

 4. References.

   a. AR 5-1, Total Army Quality Management

   b. AR 11-2, Management Control

   c. FM 22-100, Army Leadership

   d. ER 25-1-8, The Community ofPractice (CoP) in the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
      (USACE,) dtd 23 January 2006

   e. A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (P MBO~ Guide) - Third
      Edition, Project Management Institute, ~nc., 2004

 5. Definitions. Appendix A provides definitions to ensure a common understanding of key and
 essential terms.

 6. USACE Business Doctrine.

   a. Mission-Focused Execution. USACE shall make resource decisions based on what is best
for the mission, the Nation, and the public while considering the impacts to all customers.
Leaders facilitate smart use of resources, technical competency, and innovation across the
organization with a focus on mission execution. As public servants, all USACE employees have
taken an oath to support and defend the interests of the United States and its citizens.
Accordingly, all USACE employees must make decisions based on the best interests of the
Nation, the Army, and the public. Recognition of this preeminent responsibility is critical to
properly balancing the many interests that USACE faces in executing its missions.

This regulation supersedes ER 5-1-11, Program and Project Management, 17 August 2001
                                                                                       ER 5-1-11
                                                                                   1 November 06



   b. Teamwork. USACE operates as a team serving the Army and the Nation. USACE seeks
to meet the Nation's needs as efficiently and effectively as possible. To achieve this, people with
the right skills and tools must work on the right job. All organizations must act in unison across
boundaries to draw on combined strengths and leverage the resources of the public and private
sectors to meet national needs. By sharing knowledge, Communities of Practice (CoPs) in
USACE build, maintain, and provide expertise and capability to accomplish the USACE
miSSIOn.


    c. Customer Focus. The execution of all USACE work, project delivery, and program
execution across organizational boundaries must appear seamless to customers. This "one door
to the Corps" concept means that any USACE activity that receives a customer request for
support must ensure that customer receives the best USACE can provide, putting aside self
interests. When a customer develops a trusting relationship with a particular individual or
district, the customer may wish to go through that entity for all their Corps support, even if
outside that entity's area of responsibility; that entity must ensure they leverage the best and
most cost effective assets from across USACE.

  d. Operating Principles. Five universal operating principles govern all work performed by
USACE. It is the responsibility of senior leaders to ensure these imperatives are followed across
USACE for all work.

                             USACE Business Process Imperatives
      1. Plan for success and keep commitments
      2. Measure quality with the goals and~xpectations ofthe customer in mind
      3. Build effective communications into all activities and processes
      4. Use best practices and seek continual improvement
      5. Use corporate automated information systems consistently and accurately

        (1) Plan for success and keep commitments. All work shall be managed with a written
plan. Planning enables us to fully understand our customers' requirements, as well as build trust
with customers and coworkers by clarifying expectations, keeping commitments, and ensuring
all products and services are delivered as promised. Each person contributes to success by
meeting the requirements of his or her role, regardless of functional area or echelon within the
organization. People may contribute to mission success individually, as part of a team, or
indirectly as a provider of support services.

        (2) Measure quality with the goals and expectations of the customer in mind. Quality
is the degree to which a set of inherent characteristics fulfills requirements. US ACE strives to
meet or exceed the goals, objectives, and expectations of the customer, while complying with
legal obligations and administration policy. All employees contribute to our ability to succeed.
Each person is responsible and accountable for the timeliness and quality of his or her work.
Quality is managed through the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle, which is described at Appendix B.


                                                 2
                                                                                        ER 5-1-11
                                                                                    1 November 06


        (3) Build effective communications into all activities and processes. USACE utilizes
effective communication to interact internally as a team and externally with partners,
stakeholders, and customers. Communication is essential to foster: cooperation; focused
understanding of requirements and expected outcomes; and the continual improvement to the
business processes that are so vital to continued success. Effective communication is critical to
the meaningful exchange of ideas, desires, requirements and plans. US ACE will make relevant
information fully and readily available consistent with law and national security interests.

        (4) Use best practices and seek continual improvement. USACE strives to do the right
things, the right way, for the right reasons, and to constantly improve. Evaluating performance
during and after completion of work can produce opportunities to further improve business
processes, in terms of execution, productivity, cost effectiveness, streamlined processes,
timeliness, quality, and customer service. As a learning organization, USACE uses CoPs to
standardize common procedures and facilitate sharing of knowledge and best practices. CoPs
simplify working across boundaries and incorporating lessons learned. Before beginning any
new project, activity, or service, each individual shall check for applicable lessons learned and
best practices in USACE lessons learned databases.

        (5) Use corporate automated information systems consistently and accurately.
Consistent, timely, and accurate use of corporate automated information systems (AIS) is
necessary to ensure data validity, integrity, and accessibility. Access to meaningful and accurate
information is paramount to managing our programs, projects, and meeting customer
commitments; data stored within our corporate AIS help execute enterprise level business
processes and provide decision support. All data must be managed in such a fashion to achieve
interoperability as well as regional and corporate visibility of essential information that can be
seamlessly shared across USACE, its customers, stakeholders, and partners. Each and every
individual is responsible for data quality in the corporate AIS. For example, different team
members may be responsible for the integrity and validity of data in Corps of Engineers
Financial Management System (CEFMS,) Resident Management System (RMS,) Real Estate
Management Information System (REMIS,) Facilities and Equipment Maintenance System
(FEMS,) Procurement Desktop 2 (PD2,) Design Review and Checking System (DrChecks 8M,)
Project Management Information System 2 (P2), and other AIS.

    e. All work accomplished by USACE is cqnsidered part of a program. A program is a
collection of related projects, services, routine administrative and recurring operational
processes, or some mixture of these. Programs are executed to provide projects, products, and
services for both internal and external customers. Programs can be organized by customer
(internal or external), appropriation, similarity of scope, or by other unifying characteristics.
Programs shall be managed in accordance with the overarching principles ofthe USACE
business process.




                                                 3
                                                                                                  ER 5-1-11
                                                                                              I November 06


7. Project Delivery Process. A project is a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique
product, service, or result. 1 The Project Management Business Process (PMBP) is the
fundamental method used to deliver quality projects at all echelons of USACE.

    a. Central Tenet ofPMBP. The heart of the PMBP is results-focused teamwork. We draw
on the diverse resources ofUSACE worldwide to assemble strong multi-disciplinary teams,
unconstrained by geography or organizational boundaries, to best meet the customers' needs, and
the national/public interests. This regulation empowers Project Delivery Teams (PDTs) with the
authority and responsibility for delivering quality products and services.

    b. PMBP Imperatives. In addition to the five USACE business process principles, there are
three imperatives that govern the successful completion of projects.

                                           PMBP Imperatives
         I. One project, one team, one Project Manager (PM)
         2. Manage all projects with a Project Management Plan (PMP)
         3. The Project Delivery Team (PDT) is responsible for project success

        (1) One project, one team, one Project Manager (PM) Each project is assigned to one
PDT, with a single PM for management and leadership during the life cycle of the project.
Senior leaders select the PM based on the individual's abilities to best lead the specific project
without regard to assigned organizational element. Generally, the PM will reside in the
geographic area of responsibility, but can be elsewhere as needed to meet project requirements.
The PDT shall consist of everyone necessary for successful development and execution of all
phases of the project. The customer is an integral part of the PDT. The PM is responsible for
ensuring that the necessary disciplines and perspectives are represented within the PDT. The
PDT may be drawn from more than one USACE district or activity and may include specialists,
consultants/contractors, stakeholders, or representatives from other federal and state agencies.
Team members shall be chosen for their skills and abilities to successfully execute a quality
project, regardless of their assigned functional or geographic locations within USACE. Virtual
and matrix teams shall be used to align USACE efforts and focus on quality project delivery.
The team will expand to include all necessary expertise on a specific issue and may include a
vertical aspect encompassing the MSC and headquarters.




1
 Project Management Institute, A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBO/(W Guide)-
Third Edition, Project Management Institute, Inc., 2004. Copyright and all rights reserved. Material from this
publication has been reproduced with the permission of PMI.




                                                       4
                                                                                       ER 5-1-11
                                                                                   1 November 06


        (2) Manage all projects with a Project Management Plan (PMP). To meet mission
objectives, each project is managed under a project management plan (PMP). A PMP is a
roadmap for quality project delivery. The PM and the PDT work with the customer early in the
project scoping process to determine what the customer needs and to refine those requirements in
light of safety, fiscal, schedule, legal, and other constraints. The PDT shall measure its success
against the expectations documented in the PMP, which is an agreement between US ACE and
the customer that defines project objectives ahd project-specific quality control procedures
appropriate to the size, complexity, acquisition strategy, project delivery, and nature of each
product. It should be signed by all PDT members, including the customer; to document their
commitment to project success. To be an effective management and communication tool, the
plan must be a living document that is updated as conditions change. The PM will inform
customers when their requests will cause significant scope, schedule, or cost impacts, and will
coordinate any changes to the project with the customer and PDT, updating the PMP as
appropriate.
        All work is managed using the PMP and all PDT members share this responsibility. The
PM and PDT will develop and maintain the PMP at a level of detail commensurate with the
scope of the project. PMPs should be concise and succinct, but address all processes and areas
necessary to ensure effective project execution. Minimum requirements for project management
plans are found in the PMBP Manual. Management of similar projects of limited scope using a
Program Management Plan (PgMP) rather than an individual PMP for each is acceptable.
However, when a project under a program is of such scope that it is no longer manageable under
the PgMP, it shall be managed with a separate PMP.

         (3) The Project Delivery Team (PDT) is responsible for project success. The PDT is
empowered and supported by senior organizational leaders to make project decisions within the
bounds of the approved PMP. Led by the Project Manager, they are empowered to act in unison
across organizational boundaries focusing on consistent service to customers. Senior leaders
are responsible to ensure the team has the resources, tools, skills, and experience needed to
deliver a quality project. Though projects may include many distinct, separate phases, they must
be approached from an integrated, life-cycle perspective focused on meeting the project's goals,
objectives, and expectations.
         The PDT shall work with customers to determine and provide what is expected and must
strive to deliver products and services that are in the public interest. The needs and expectations
of customers and stakeholders shall be balanced, while considering available resources and life-
cycle requirements. Expectations ofthe beneficiaries and/or stakeholders of projects are
considered when determining quality objectives. USACE will not compromise professional
standards. Requirements that exceed mandatory standards are negotiated with the customer
based on the project's complexity, available resources, and the degree of risk the customer and
USACE are willing to assume.

8. Process for Other Work.

   a. Recognizing that all work is not a project, several key USACE functions are organized
around ongoing, recurring, and cyclical work rather than discrete projects. Other non-project
work can include some operations and maintenance
                                              I
                                                     (O&M) activities at completed works,
regulatory permitting, flood plain management, general and administrative support, and real


                                                 5
                                                                                       ER 5-1-11
                                                                                   1 November 06


estate actions. However, some of this work (eg. major maintenance, some regulatory work, and
real estate) is a project and should be managed in accordance with the Project Delivery Process.

      (1) For example, in the Real Estate function, a major land acquisition, land disposal, and
BRAC-related acquisitions are projects, whereas outgrants, renewal of recruiting leases, and
management of leases are not.

      (2) Fielding a new system is a project in the Corporate Information world, but records
management, maintaining the library, and operating and sustaining a system are other work.

        (3) Research and Development (R&D) Projects include basic research (e.g., development
of new and advanced inorganic cements that bond to reinforcing materials), applied research
(e.g., development of protective measures, decision aids and concepts for base camp protection
against terrorist and conventional contingency environments) and demonstration R&D military
studies and applied civil works R&D studies (e.g., development of concrete armor unit
technology for coastal structures, Core Loc). Additional project examples include civil (e.g.,
development ofthe Regional Internet Bank Information Tracking System for EPA to assist in
day-to-day mitigation banking business) and military (e.g., developed and produced for the
Army Environmental Center as an alternative: to lead bullets for use on small arms training
ranges) reimbursable studies for other federal' agencies and state and local governments.
Examples of non-project work include items such as Corps of Engineers Enterprise Infrastructure
Services, (which provides for the 24 hours a day, 365 days per year primary information
technology infrastructure for USACE,) the day-to-day maintenance and administrative oversight
of the R&D grounds and facilities, and routine/redundant laboratory testing/analysis.

        (4) Most business lines within USACE Operations undertake both project and non-
project work:
                (a) Creation of Level 1 inventories and development of an original master plan are
projects for the Environmental Stewardship and Environmental Restoration business lines, while
periodic updating and maintaining those plans are "other work."
                (b) In the Recreation arena, a major park upgrade is a project; operating a visitor
center and operation/administration of a recreation area are non-project work.
                (c) Examples of projects in the Navigation and Flood Coastal Reduction Business
Lines are rehabilitation of a lock, restoration of a beach, and large, multi-year or event-driven
dredging. Examples of non-project work in this area include dam safety inspections, lock
dewatering, lock and dam operation and maintenance, and annual or routine recurring dredging
occurring under a single contract.               .
                (d) Reconnaissance studies and feasibility studies and creation of a watershed
plan are projects in Planning, whereas on-goi:qg watershed planning and flood plain management
are both non-project work.
                (e) Regulatory projects include individual/standard permit actions and
Environmental Impact Studies (EIS), and wetland delineation. Permit enforcement and handling
administrative appeals are examples of non-project work.
                (f) Within the Emergency Management/Readiness function, Disaster Recovery
and Response would be considered a program; however, within that program are individual
recovery (long-term restoration of the environment for people) projects such as Debris Removal,


                                                 6
                                                                                       ER 5-1-11
                                                                                   1 November 06


Temporary Housing, and Temporary Roofing. Examples of "other work" are the response (i.e.
immediate 30 days or less life-saving) missions ofProcuring and Providing Ice and Water,
Providing Emergency Power, and Urban Search and Rescue.

    b. Like projects, however, this ongoing work is still planned, executed, and controlled. 2 In
order to support achievement of quality objectives, all activities considered to be other work will
be performed in full accordance with the USACE business doctrine described in paragraph 6.
Elements of the PMBP as described in paragraph 7 may be used at the discretion of the executing
entity. For example instance, multi-disciplinary teams are used throughout USACE to execute
non-project work such as normal operations of a recreation area or dam safety inspections.
                                              i
   c. All work will be managed in accordan~e with a control document (e.g. Program
Management Plan (PgMP) or other programmatically specified document) for the purpose of
allocating funds and resources, and establishing program goals, objectives, acquisition strategy,
and priorities on an annual basis. A PgMP is a necessity when mission success requires synergy
and integration between individual projects or activities in a program. When an individual
project under a program is of such scope that it is no longer manageable under the PgMP, it shall
be managed with a separate PMP.

9. Roles and Responsibilities. HQUSACE, Major Subordinate Commands (MSCs), centers,
laboratories, and districts all have direct responsibility for quality and process improvement. All
echelons ofUSACE work together to ensure and enhance the quality of our projects and
services. The goal is to create an environment that promotes communication, respect, trust, and
cooperation. USACE is a corporate entity operating through Regional Business Centers (RBCs).

   a. HQUSACE communicates philosophy and strategic vision through policy allowing
subordinates to tailor services on a case-by-case basis. HQUSACE and MSCs employ vertical
teaming such as Regional Integration Teams and District Support Teams to address work
coordination and policy issues. HQUSACE interacts with national customers, other agencies,
and private industry regarding programmatic issues.
                                                  I



    b. MSCs manage the RBCs facilitating rbsults-focused operations and utilizing appropriate
technical resources and innovative practices. MSCs remove encumbrances to regional
excellence. MSCs ensure that customers whose work crosses RBC boundaries receive seamless
service and are responsible for vertical and horizontal coordination and integration. MSCs
perform quality assurance of the RBC quality processes through periodic evaluations using an
integrated approach consistent with the USACE business process.

   c. Commanders are ultimately responsible for all that happens or fails to happen in their
organizations. Commanders empower their workforces to operate within the framework of the
USACE business process in executing the mission. The Commander is the leader of the
corporate team, which sets the strategic direction for the organization. Within ERDC, these
responsibilities are vested in the Directors.

2
    Ibid



                                                      7
                                                                                       ER 5-1-11
                                                                                   1 November 06



   d. The Deputy for Program and Project Management (DPM) has programmatic oversight
over all work in a District. The DPM is responsible for the vertical and horizontal integration of
products to produce the projects and manage programs in accordance with the USACE business
process. The DPM provides continuity of corporate leadership in developing and assessing
mission and work requirements and in developing corporate programs, plans, goals, and
objectives.

   e. Senior leaders, working as a corporate team, create the conditions necessary for success
through actions and behavior consistent with the USACE business process. The corporate team
promotes the long-term success ofthe organization through strategic planning. District senior
leaders within the RBC evaluate workload projections, staffing, technical expertise, and market
conditions to ensure that we will be able to support our customers in the future.

   f. Middle managers work together at the operational level ofthe organization, with a focus on
executing the current year's mission and planning for the next year. They provide adequate
resources and delegate authority commensurate with responsibilities to subordinates to facilitate
success and maintain a quality workforce. By working as a team, middle managers can help
ensure selection of optimal execution strategies and maintain technical expertise across the RBC.

   g. Supervisors at all levels of the organization lead their staffs to implement the USACE
business process to successfully execute the mission. They maintain a high level of professional
expertise within their organizations and are responsible for the quality of the processes employed
to execute all work. They work as a management !
                                                    team to assign work, balance workload and
resolve resource conflicts on an ongoing basi~.

   h. Program managers (PgMs) are responsible for management of unique customer
requirements for a set of related projects, services, or activities. They integrate program
information and are responsible for making accurate program projections necessary to support
workload analysis at the local, regional, and national level. Program managers will often be the
Point of Contact (POC) for interaction with the customer on their assigned program. Program
managers include Operations Project Managers responsible for the overall O&M of one or more
multi-purpose water resource development sites, leading teams that execute the projects or
recurring work activities at these sites.

  j. The Project Manager (PM) manages scope, schedule, quality, and budget while leading a
project delivery team to successful project execution. This individual is the primary interface
with the customer and is also the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' primary internal advocate for
the specific project. PMs manage all project resources, information, and commitments, and
integrate and focus the efforts of the PDT. The PM's active role as consultant is essential to
ensure that the customer's quality objectives are clearly articulated and that the customer
understands the essential professional standards, laws, and codes, as well as public trust issues
that must be incorporated into the project. In performing these functions, the PMs must operate
consistent with their responsibilities as a public servant (federal official). PMs provide PDT
leadership and facilitation with responsibility for assuring that the project stays focused on the
public interest and on the customer's needs and expectations.


                                                 8
                                                                                       ER 5-1-11
                                                                                   1 November 06



   k. The PDT is responsible and accountable for delivering a quality project to the customer and
for ensuring effective, coordinated actions to deliver the completed project according to the
PMP. Team members are responsible and accountable to the PDT for the timeliness and quality
of their own work, and for keeping commitments for completion of their portion of the project as
documented in the PMP, as well as coordination with and keeping all other team members
informed. Each PDT member represents their functional organization and must be empowered
io make commitments and decisions on that organization's behalf; likewise, each PDT member
is expected to communicate back to their functional element all relevant decisions, commitments
and expectations.

10. Management Control

    a. Leaders at all levels make resource decisions based upon what is best for the mission,
while considering impacts to all customers. Management controls, such as quality controls, are
the responsibility ofthe leadership at all levels ofUSACE, from the District Commander and the
MSC Commander, through to the Chief of Engineers. The commanders are responsible for
assessing the absence or ineffectiveness of management controls. Whether the weakness is
serious enough to be considered material and reported to the next level of command is a
management judgment that must be made based on the criteria and other factors outlined in AR
11-2. Reports of material weakness must specify corrective actions taken or planned. The
highest echelon receiving the report will evaluate the corrective actions, provide assistance, if
needed, and track progress.

    b. All echelons are to lead and support efforts to collaborate, measure, manage, and improve
the business processin accordance with AR 5-1, AR 11-2, and FM 22-100. Command
Management Reviews, performance improvement processes, and standards at regional and
national levels will be used to review, validate, and sustain the best business practices.

   c. Headquarters, in concert with field offices, will develop and promulgate guidance media
with context and examples of the precepts, and representations for a better understanding,
implementation, and learning culture of the USACE Business Process.


FOR THE COMMANDER:




3 Appendices
                                                                 ~
                                                                 .PRETT~
                                                     Colonel, Corps of Engineers
APP A - Definitions                                  Chief of Staff
APP B -Plan-Do-Check-Act Cycle
APP C - USACE Doctrinal/Process Hierarchy



                                                9
                                                                                     ER 5-1-11
                                                                                 1 November 06
                                        APPENDIX A

                                        DEFINITIONS

Automated Information Systems: A combination of computer hardware and software,
telecommunications information technology, personnel, and other resources that collect, record,
process, store, communicate, retrieve, and display information.

Community ofPractice: A group of people who regularly interact to collectively learn, solve
problems, build skills and competencies, and develop best practices around a shared concern,
goal, mission, set of problems, or work practice. More information on the various communities
of practice in US ACE is available from their respective websites.

Customer: Customer as used in this regulation may be a number of people/organizations. In
general, the customer is any individual or organization for which USACE delivers projects, or
services to meet specific needs. Customers may be either external or internal to USACE.

Deputy for Programs and Project Management (PPM): The civilian deputy to the District
Commander. DPM as used in this regulation includes Center positions such as Deputy for
Programs and Technical Management and Deputy for Programs and Project Management/Project
Delivery Team.

District Support Teams: Cross-functional teams at MSCs that facilitate resolution of issues and
champion district causes.

Empowerment: Authority to exercise judgment and take action, with concomitant responsibility
for resultant positive or negative consequences.

Functional Organization: Organization structure in which staff are grouped by technical
specialty.

Matrix Team: Group of people working across organization boundaries for a common purpose.

Operations:
a.) The ongoing execution of activities that produces the same product or provides a continuous
or repetitive service. The objective of ongoing operations is to sustain something (business,
facility).
b.) Within USACE, the organization that operates and maintains facilities and services that
provide river and harbor navigation, flood damage reduction, water supply, hydroelectric power,
recreation, environmental and fish and wildlife sustainment, restoration and protection. Its
Regulatory mission protects the Nation's waterways and wetlands; and it undertakes disaster
relief and recovery work through its Emergency Management/Readiness function.

Process: A series of actions, tasks, or procedures with a common objective to achieve an end or
result.




                                               A-1
                                                                                       ER 5-1-11
                                                                                   1 November 06
Program: A collection of related projects, services, routine administrative and recurring
operational processes, or some mixture of these, which are managed in a coordinated way to
obtain benefits and control not available from managing them individually. 3 Programs may be
categorized by funding source, customer, similarity of scope, or other common criteria for which
resources are allocated and collectively managed.

Program Management: The centralized, coordinated management ofprograms within available
resources, in accordance with applicable laws, policies, and regulations, to achieve strategic
benefits and objectives. 4 Under program management, programs, projects and non-project
activities are aggregated for oversight and direction by the organization's senior leadership.

Program Management Plan (PgMP): A formal, approved, living document used to define
program requirements and expectations, including accountability and performance
measurements, and guide program execution and control.

Project: A temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or result. 5
Internal services are discrete projects when they are unique and non-recurring.

Project Delivery Team (PDT): The team, led by a project manager, composed of everyone
necessary for successful development and execution of all phases of the project. The PDT may
be drawn from more than one USACE district or activity and may include specialists,
consultants/contractors, stakeholders, or representatives from other federal and state agencies.
Team members are chosen for their skills and abilities to successfully execute a quality project,
regardless of their assigned functional or geographic locations within USACE. The team will
expand to include all necessary expertise on a specific issue and may include a vertical aspect
encompassing the MSC and headquarters.

Project Management: The application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to project
activities in order to meet project requirements. 6

Project Manager (PM): Assigned to achieve the project objectives, the person who manages
scope, schedule, quality and budget while leading a project delivery team (PDT.) Project
managers may be assigned to any organizational or geographic element.

Project Management Business Process (PMBP): A fundamental subset of the US ACE business
process used to deliver quality projects. It re~ects the USACE corporate commitment to provide
"customer service" that is inclusive, seamless; flexible, effective, and efficient. It embodies
communication, leadership, systematic and coordinated management, teamwork, partnering,
effective balancing of competing demands, and primary accountability for the life cycle of a
project. For more information please visit the USACE PMBP portal at
https ://pm bp. usace.arm y .mil/


3
  Ibid
4
  1bid
5
  1bid
6
  1bid


                                                A-2
                                                                                       ER 5-1-11
                                                                                   1 November 06
Project Management Plan (PMP): A formal, approved, living document used to define
requirements and expected outcomes and guide project execution and control. Primary uses of
the PMP are to facilitate communication among participants, assign responsibilities, define
assumptions, and document decisions to establish baseline plans for scope, cost, schedule and
quality objectives against which performance can be measured, and to adjust these plans as
actuals dictate. PMP is developed by the project delivery team (PDT).

Quality: The degree to which a set of inherent characteristics fulfills requirements.

Quality Assurance (QA): That part of quality management focused on providing confidence that
quality requirements of a project, product, service, or process will be fulfilled. QA includes
those processes employed to ensure that QC activities are being accomplished in accordance
with planned activities and that those QC activities are effective in producing a product that
meets the desired end quality.

Quality Control (QC): That part of quality management focused on fulfilling quality
requirements of a project, product, service, or process. It includes those processes used to ensure
performance meets agreed upon customer requirements that are consistent with law, regulations,
policies, sound technical criteria, schedules, and budget.

Regional Business Center: An MSC and its districts acting together as a regional business entity.
This vertical and lateral integration of organizational capabilities, resource sharing, technical
expertise, project management, and project delivery broadens and enhances the range of services
and quality within the region.

Regional Integration Team: Cross-functional teams at HQUSACE that facilitate resolution of
issues and champion RBC causes.

Stakeholders: Individuals and organizations who are involved in or may be affected by the
project.

Vertical Team: Team that is composed of personnel from different command levels in the
organization.

Virtual Team: Team working across geographic or organizational boundaries without physical
co-location.

Work: Sustained physical or mental effort or activity directed toward the production or
accomplishment of something. Work of a business can generally be categorized as either
projects or operations, although there may be some overlap.




                                                A-3
                                                                                       ER 5-1-11
                                                                                   1 November 06

                                         APPENDIX B

                                   Plan-Do-Check-Act Cycle


    1. Plan for                                                   2. Work the
      Quality                                                     Plan- build
                                                                   Quality in




   4. Revise
  procedures                                                           for
                                                                    Problems

1. Plan: We assign the right people with the right skills and tools to work on the right project.
We plan for and build quality into our work at each step in the process. We use a systematic
planning process to identify the customer's quality goals; develop an effective plan and
processes to achieve those goals, and measure our attainment of the quality objectives. We help
our customers to express their desired outcomes in objective, quantitative terms. We
communicate with our customers to ensure mutual understanding of standards and processes. It
is essential that the project team, which includes the customer, understand the costs and benefits
of selected quality standards and the processes to be used to achieve mutual objectives. We
identify appropriate standards and determine how to achieve them, consulting lessons learned on
previous projects as appropriate. We consider the risk factors and complexity of each project,
and adapt processes to provide the requisite level of quality. We consult, advise, and reach
consensus with the customer before we do work. We use value engineering when it serves to
increase the quality of our projects. The product of the planning phase is the project
management plan (PMP).

2. Do: We then do the work according to approved PMPs and documented procedures. Our
procedures are developed and documented with sufficient detail to ensure that actions are
performed correctly and completely each time. Project and program execution is a dynamic
process. The team must communicate and adapt to changing conditions and modify project
plans to ensure project objectives are met. Quality management consists of executing a well-
conceived and continually updated PMP.
                                                           ,,


                                               B-1
ER 5-1-11
1 November 06


3. Check: We perform sufficient independent technical review, management oversight, and
verification to ensure that we meet the quality objectives documented in the PMP. Team
members periodically check performance against the plan and verify sufficiency of the plan and
actual performance to meet or exceed agreed-on objectives. After action reviews are conducted
to facilitate sharing of lessons learned. Findings are shared with the project teams and other
personnel to facilitate continuous improvement.

4. Act: We take specific corrective actions to remove the systemic cause of any non-
conformance, deficiency, or other unwanted effect. We improve quality through systematic
analysis and refinement of work processes. The process of continuous quality improvement
leads to the refinement of the overall quality system. Quality improvements include appropriate
revisions to quality management plans, alteration of procedures, and adjustments to resource
allocations.




                                              B-2
                                                                                    ER 5-1-11
                                                                                1 November 06
                                                      APPENDIXC

                                   USACE Doctrinal/Process Hierarchy




       1. Pkvlfar fi1J.:<:N$and bvp <:Q>111Mif»Wifls
       2. Jlft.vtm."' q~~aiU>•wit.h IM gp.;~MI/#JI~~MDjtM .:lit~~~I' ilt #<WI
        3.. &/J 11/focli•-. ca--~~r~aatl acr.n·lrJr$ and ptoc<~a«
        4. Ulll wst~sg.otJ#U<.c~iJ'fJ'"'-Nl
        5.u.,   ~~-m.w~ !Jt{i?mroi~M syst.~ -~~~~mrd.:c<:W'!'Jt<tl>'




          Project Delive'Y                                  Process for
          Process (PMBP)                                    Other Work




The above is a graphical representation ofthe organization ofER 5-1-11 as well as its
relationship to other doctrine, business processes and AIS's.

The USACE Business Process Imperatives are applicable across the organization, just as
we apply the Army values within USACE. These universally applicable principles
include, for example: planning for success, measuring goals based on customer
expectations, emphasizing effective communications, seeking best practices and
maintaining accurate corporate data.

The Project Management Business Process, PMBP, focuses on the management of
projects, while other processes focus on the management of other work. Although both
types of work share important characteristics applying the most appropriate processes and
tools to different types of work will bring greater effici~ncies and effectiveness to each.




                                                                C-1
